feat: dropdown recipe (#96)
moxystudio/next-with-moxy: docusaurus/docs/recipes/dropdown.md

---
id: dropdown
title: Implementing a Dropdown
sidebar_label: Dropdown
---

> Implementing a Dropdown/Select component from the scratch is always a big challenge. A lot of things have to be considered being some of them accessibility, autocomplete feature, multi-selection feature, native support (for touch devices mainly).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Implementing a Dropdown/Select component from the scratch is always a big challenge with a lot of things to consider such as accessibility, autocomplete feature, multi-selection feature, native support (for touch devices mainly).
```

Reviewer 2: I'd also change `from the scratch` to `from scratch` as it's more widely used.

Reviewer: I missed that one but I updated my comment with that change now, thanks!

There are open-source libraries like [react-select](https://github.com/JedWatson/react-select) to help us out on this task but usually their API is not that friendly. This happens because these libraries will render the input and the menu for themselves. For some of them, we are allowed to change what we want to render but it will render on a specific location. Other ones provide a list of `classNames` that can be used to change the style of the rendered component the way it fits best for us.

The main problem of these libraries is the lack of flexibility while using them to build our custom dropdown. That's where [downshift](https://github.com/downshift-js/downshift) comes into play.

### What is Downshift 🏎?

> Primitives to build simple, flexible, WAI-ARIA compliant React autocomplete, combobox or select dropdown components.

This is how [Kent C. Dodds](https://kentcdodds.com/) describes his library.

> Downshift mainly takes care of three things: **managing state**; **user interactions**; and **accessibility**. The rendering task is all up to the developer. This is possible because it uses both [render prop pattern](https://reactjs.org/docs/render-props.html) and [prop getters concept](https://kentcdodds.com/blog/how-to-give-rendering-control-to-users-with-prop-getters) as its core concept.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Downshift mainly takes care of three things: **managing state**, **user interactions** and **accessibility**. The rendering task is all up to the developer. This is possible because it uses both the [render prop pattern](https://reactjs.org/docs/render-props.html) and the [prop getters concept](https://kentcdodds.com/blog/how-to-give-rendering-control-to-users-with-prop-getters) at its core.
```

    },
];
```

We already have our data. What about now? The following code block is a complete example of how to develop a Dropdown component. Check the example first and then follow the explanation to better understand it.

#### 1. Component

ℹ️ We are using [`useSelect` hook](https://github.com/downshift-js/downshift/tree/master/src/hooks/useSelect) to build our example. You can use the [`<Downshift>` component](https://github.com/downshift-js/downshift#downshift-component) as well to achieve the same result. Check an example [here](https://github.com/downshift-js/downshift#usage).

```js
// Dropdown.js file

import React, { useCallback } from 'react';
import PropTypes from 'prop-types';
import { useSelect } from 'downshift';
import classNames from 'classnames';
import DropdownItem from 'path-to-dropdown-item';

import styles from './Dropdown.module.css';

const itemToString = (item) => item ? item.value : '';
const placeholderLabel = 'Choose your option';

const Dropdown = ({ items, onStateChange, className, ...rest }) => {
    const {
        isOpen,
        selectedItem,
        highlightedIndex,
        getMenuProps,
        getItemProps,
        getToggleButtonProps,

>     } = useSelect({ itemToString, items, onStateChange });

Author: An `id` prop must be set when we are server rendering downshift. See [comment#429663734](https://github.com/downshift-js/downshift/issues/602#issuecomment-429663734).

    const renderDropdownItems = useCallback(() => items.map((item, index) => (
        <DropdownItem
            item={ item }
            key={ `dropdown-item-${index}` }
            selected={ selectedItem === item }
            highlighted={ highlightedIndex === index }
            { ...getItemProps({ item, index }) } />
    )), [highlightedIndex, getItemProps, selectedItem, items]);

    return (
        <div { ...rest } className={ classNames(styles.container, className) }>

>             <button

Author: an `id` prop must be provided if we are server rendering downshift. Ref: [comment#429663734](https://github.com/downshift-js/downshift/issues/602#issuecomment-429663734).

                className={ classNames(styles.trigger, { [styles.isOpen]: isOpen }) }
                { ...getToggleButtonProps() }>
                { selectedItem?.label ?? placeholderLabel }
            </button>
            <ul className={ styles.menu } { ...getMenuProps() }>
                { isOpen && renderDropdownItems() }
            </ul>
        </div>
    );
};

Dropdown.propTypes = {
    className: PropTypes.string,
    onStateChange: PropTypes.func,

>     items: PropTypes.array.isRequired,

Reviewer 2: I would leave it like this as the developer may want to add additional data to the items and not just have the `label` and `value`.

>     items: PropTypes.array.isRequired,

Author: I got your point. The thing is: your items can be whatever you want as long as you pass the `useSelect()` hook a string representation of your item (using `itemToString` prop). 

Due to this reason, I think there's no need to elaborate on the prop types checking. If I change `items` prop to what you suggested, we might confuse developers as it seems you are forced to pass your items with `label` and `value`, which is not true.

>     items: PropTypes.array.isRequired,

Reviewer 3: I see @PedroMiguelSS. Considering this, I think it is fine as it is right now

};

export default Dropdown;
```

```js
// DropdownItem.js file

import React from 'react';
import PropTypes from 'prop-types';
import classNames from 'classnames';

import styles from './DropdownItem.module.css';

> const DropdownItem = ({ item, highlighted, selected, className, ...rest }) => {

Author: Must use forwardRef

        [styles.selected]: selected,
    },
    className);

    return (
        <li { ...rest } className={ itemClasses }>
            { item.label }
        </li>
    );
};

DropdownItem.propTypes = {
    selected: PropTypes.bool,
    highlighted: PropTypes.bool,
    className: PropTypes.string,
    item: PropTypes.object.isRequired,
};

DropdownItem.defaultProps = {
    selected: false,
    highlighted: false,
};

export default DropdownItem;
```

#### 2. Explanation

**Structure**

Before diving into how the `useSelect` hook works, let's check our `Dropdown.js` file and let's analyze the structure of our `Dropdown` element:

- container `<div className={ styles.container }>...</div>` - it is the shell of our Dropdown and wraps both the trigger element and the menu element (`Dropdown.js` file)
- button `<button className={ ... }>...</button>` - this element is responsible for toggling the dropdown menu (`Dropdown.js` file)
- menu `<ul className={ styles.menu }>...</ul>` - this element represents the menu and it contains the list of items (`Dropdown.js` file)
- item `<li className={ ... }>...</li>` - this element represents each menu item (`DropdownItem.js` file)

> ⚠️ These elements are the ones we think that better represents our dropdown semantically. However, you can change the elements as long as you pass them the right props. E.g.: you can replace the `<button { ...getToggleButtonProps() }>` for a `<div { ...getToggleButtonProps() }>`. If you make changes like this, please check if accessibility is still working as expected. In this specific case, you would need to add `tabIndex="0"` prop to your `<div>` so that it becomes focusable in sequential keyboard navigation.

Author: Yap, maybe it's a good idea. Thanks.

**`useSelect` hook**

_Props_

> It's important to know that while using Downshift we are dealing with a lot of props. Some of them are considered [basic](https://github.com/downshift-js/downshift/tree/master/src/hooks/useSelect#basic-props), other ones are considered [advanced](https://github.com/downshift-js/downshift/tree/master/src/hooks/useSelect#advanced-props). We need to pass some of them to `useSelect`, in order to get other ones. Long story short: some props are returned by this hook, other ones need to be passed to it.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
It's important to know that while using Downshift we are dealing with a lot of props, with some of them being considered [basic](https://github.com/downshift-js/downshift/tree/master/src/hooks/useSelect#basic-props) and others [advanced](https://github.com/downshift-js/downshift/tree/master/src/hooks/useSelect#advanced-props). We need to pass some of them to `useSelect`, in order to get other ones. Long story short: some props are returned by this hook, other ones need to be passed to it.
```

Looking at our example in `Dropdown.js` file, we are passing `items`, `itemToString` and `onStateChange` callback. `useSelect` is returning `isOpen`, `selectedItem`, `highlightedIndex`, `getMenuProps`, `getItemProps` and `getToggleButtonProps` props.

- `items` - we are passing our array of items.
- `itemToString` - our array of items contains objects. Downshift needs a string representation for each item to keep accessibility working properly. Read more about it [here](https://github.com/downshift-js/downshift/tree/master/src/hooks/useSelect#itemtostring).

> - `onStateChange` - we don't really need this prop for our example to work, but it was added for demonstration purposes. Every time the internal state changes (item is selected, menu is open, menu is close, etc), the callback will be fired with the new state. If you just want a callback to run when a different item is selected, you can use [`onSelecteItemChange`](https://github.com/downshift-js/downshift/tree/master/src/hooks/useSelect#onselecteditemchange) instead.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `onStateChange` - we don't really need this prop for our example to work, but it was added for demonstration purposes. Every time the internal state changes (item is selected, menu is open, menu is closed, etc), the callback will be fired with the new state. If you just want a callback to run when a different item is selected, you can use [`onSelectedItemChange`](https://github.com/downshift-js/downshift/tree/master/src/hooks/useSelect#onselecteditemchange) instead.
```

- `selectedItem` - the currently selected item. We are using it to check whether an item is selected or not and pass the `selected` prop (bool) to `DropdownItem` so that we can apply some styling to our item.
- `highlightedIndex` - the index of the currently highlighted element. We are using it to check whether an item is highlighted or not and pass the `highlighted` prop to `DropdownItem` so that we can apply some styling to our item. Please note this prop is updated even with keyboard navigation.

⚠️ If you want to control yourself some of these state pieces, you can pass them as prop. E.g.: `useSelect({ items, isOpen: true })`. This example would force the menu to be always open.

_Prop Getters_

One of the core concepts of this library is _prop getters_ such as `getToggleButtonProps()` and `getMenuProps()`. These functions must be applied to the proper element and then Downshift will take care of wiring things up and make them work properly. Thus, `useSelect` provides us the following [_prop getters_](https://github.com/downshift-js/downshift/tree/master/src/hooks/useSelect#prop-getters):

> - `getToggleButtonProps` - a function that returns the props must be applied to the menu toggle button element. We are applying it to our `button` element. Further details on their [documentation](https://github.com/downshift-js/downshift/tree/master/src/hooks/useSelect#gettogglebuttonprops).

Author: If you didn't understand what I meant, it means I really have to rephrase it 😄

What about this:

> - `getToggleButtonProps` - a props returning function. These returned props must be applied to the menu toggle button element. We are applying it to our `button` element. Further details on their [documentation](https://github.com/downshift-js/downshift/tree/master/src/hooks/useSelect#gettogglebuttonprops).

Is it cleared this way?

> - `getToggleButtonProps` - a function that returns the props must be applied to the menu toggle button element. We are applying it to our `button` element. Further details on their [documentation](https://github.com/downshift-js/downshift/tree/master/src/hooks/useSelect#gettogglebuttonprops).

Reviewer 3: Yes! Thanks 🙏

- `getItemProps` - a function that returns the props must be applied to any menu item element. We are applying it to our `item` element. Further details on their [documentation](https://github.com/downshift-js/downshift/tree/master/src/hooks/useSelect#getitemprops).
- `getLabelProps` - a function that returns the props must be applied to the label element. Further details [here](https://github.com/downshift-js/downshift/tree/master/src/hooks/useSelect#getlabelprops).
- `getMenuProps` - a function that returns the props must be applied to the menu's root element. Further details [here](https://github.com/downshift-js/downshift/tree/master/src/hooks/useSelect#getmenuprops).

_Actions_

> Although not used in this example, there is a set of props, called _actions_, returned by this hook that can be very useful to change its state imperatively. Here are some examples:

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Although they're not used in this example, there is a set of props, called _actions_, returned by this hook that can be very useful to change its state imperatively. Here are some examples:
```

> - `toggleMenu` - toggle the menu open state

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `toggleMenu` - toggles the menu open state
```

- `openMenu` - opens the menu
- `reset` - resets downshift's state

ℹ️ You can see the full list of _actions_ [here](https://github.com/downshift-js/downshift/tree/master/src/hooks/useSelect#actions).

#### 2. Component Usage

Here is an example of how to use the `<Dropdown>` component we've built so far:

```js
import React, { useCallback } from 'react';
import items from './items';
import Dropdown from './Dropdown';

export default function App() {
  const handleStateChange = useCallback((state) => console.log(state), []);

  return (
    <div>
      <h2>Dropdown with Downshift 🏎</h2>
      <Dropdown items={ items } onStateChange={ handleStateChange } />
    </div>
  );
}
```

#### 3. Native _select_ behavior support

> On mobile/touch devices the use of native _select_ behavior it's highly recommended due to UX reasons. To implement that, our `<Dropdown>` component is going to need some enhancements. Our approach will place a native select element on top of our trigger button, with the same items that we are passing to our `<Dropdown>` component, but it will invisible.   

Reviewer: ```suggestion
On mobile/touch devices the use of native _select_ behavior it's highly recommended due to UX reasons. To implement that, our `<Dropdown>` component is going to need some enhancements. Our approach will place a native select element on top of our trigger button, with the same items that we are passing to our `<Dropdown>` component, but it will be invisible.   
```

> On mobile/touch devices the use of native _select_ behavior it's highly recommended due to UX reasons. To implement that, our `<Dropdown>` component is going to need some enhancements. Our approach will place a native select element on top of our trigger button, with the same items that we are passing to our `<Dropdown>` component, but it will invisible.   

Author: Perfect, thanks 👌

Whenever an option is selected, we need to update the internal state of `Downshift` so that those changes are reflected on the custom `<Dropdown>`.

Take a look at the following steps:

**1. Create a `<NativeSelect>` component**

```js
// NativeSelect.js

import React, { useCallback } from 'react';
import PropTypes from 'prop-types';

const NativeSelect = ({
    items,
    onChange,
    placeholderLabel,
    ...rest,
}) => {
    const placeholderOption = (
        <option
            disabled
            value={ placeholderLabel }
            key="native-option-disabled">
            { placeholderLabel }
        </option>
    );

    const selectableOptions = items.map((item, index) => (
      <option key={ `native-option-${index + 1}` } value={ item.value }>
        { item.label }
      </option>
    ));

    return [placeholderOption, ...selectableOptions];

>     }, [items, placeholderLabel]);

Author: This code must be inside a `useCallback()` hook.

    const handleChange = (event) => {
        const selectedItem = items.find((elem) => elem.value === event.target.value);
        onChange(selectedItem);
    };

    return (
        <select
            { ...rest }
            onChange={ handleChange }
            defaultValue={ placeholderLabel }>
            { renderOptions() }
        </select>
    );
};

NativeSelect.propTypes = {
  items: PropTypes.array.isRequired,
  placeholderLabel: PropTypes.string
  onChange: PropTypes.func.isRequired,
};

export default NativeSelect;
```

> ⚠️ Please note we are passing a `placeholderLabel` so that the native select gets similar to the custom dropdown. You might not need it. You must be critical about what makes sense to your case scenario.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
⚠️ Please note we are passing a `placeholderLabel` so that the native select is similar to the custom dropdown. You might not need it. You must be critical about what makes sense to your case scenario.
```

I'm not sure if my corrections fits the meaning you wanted or if there's a missing word there

                items={ items }
                onClick={ toggleMenu }
                className={ styles.nativeSelect }
                placeholderLabel={ placeholderLabel } />
            // ...
        </div>
    );
};

// ...
```

```css
/* Dropdown.css file */

.container {
    /* ... */
    position: relative;
}

.nativeSelect {
    position: absolute;
    top: 0;
    left: 0;
    width: 100%;
    height: 100%;
    opacity: 0;
}
```

**5. Pass a `onChange` callback to `<NativeSelect>`**

```js
// Dropdown.js file

// ...

const Dropdown = ({ items, onStateChange, className, ...rest }) => {
    // ...

    const handleNativeSelectChange = useCallback((selectedItem) => {
        selectItem(selectedItem);
        toggleMenu();
    }, [toggleMenu, selectItem]);

    return (
        <div ... className={ classNames(styles.container, className) }>
            // ...
            <NativeSelect
                items={ items }
                onClick={ toggleMenu }
                className={ styles.nativeSelect }
                onChange={ handleNativeSelectChange }
                placeholderLabel={ placeholderLabel } />
            // ...
        </div>
    );
};

// ...
```

> ⚠️ `selectedItem` property of the internal state needs to be updated. For that, we need to pass an `onChange` callback to `<NativeSelect>`. Note that we are using `selectItem(...)` action to achieve that.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
⚠️ `selectedItem` property of the internal state needs to be updated. For that, we need to pass an `onChange` callback to `<NativeSelect>`. Note that we are using the `selectItem(...)` action to achieve that.
```

> **6. Add `display: none` to ours `<Dropdown>` menu**

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
**6. Add `display: none` to our `<Dropdown>` menu**
```

Now, by clicking on the native select, we are toggling the menu state of `Donwshift`. We need to hide our custom menu, because we just want the native menu to appear. For that, we just need to add `display: none` to our `menu` element.

```css
/* Dropdown.css file */

.menu {
    /* ... */
    display: none;
}
```

>  ⚠️ All these changes must be done only when we want to use the native behavior. Let's say we would like to use the native behavior on mobile resolutions only: we must use media queries and apply these changes on that specific resolutions. You might also need to add `display: none` to `NativeSelect` className for the resolutions where you want to use the custom menu.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
 ⚠️ All these changes must only be done when we want to use the native behavior. Let's say we would like to use the native behavior on mobile resolutions only: we must use media queries and apply these changes on that specific resolutions. You might also need to add `display: none` to `NativeSelect` className for the resolutions where you want to use the custom menu.
```
